Javier, I would love to
explain to Power MBA students what
a venture capital consists
of and how your business is.
I will try to explain
it as quickly and easily as
possible, because it
is not easy.
Venture capital, which there
is no such term in Spanish
that defines it, is a high-risk
investment.
And so, it is very much identified
what is venture capital with
investments in technology
companies, but there are also
venture capitalists who invest
in other sectors, how can biotechnology
be, how can industrial technology
be, but what has to be
developed, etc.
What happens is that really
what is most known about VCs,
venture capitalists or venture
capital funds are investments
in technology companies.
So within that sector there
are funds that specialize
either sectorally and only
invest in certain areas
or business models.
There are others more cross-sectional,
such as ours, and then there are funds
that specialize according to
the size of the investment and the
stage in which the company is
located.
So, within the venture capital funds
you have the SIDs, which is seed
in Spanish, basically when
there is virtually nothing, early
stage or initial phases when there
begins to be something, but you
are funding a little the development
still of the company, then you
have the growth, and here there
is already a validated model,
we will do a global expansion or
whatever.
And depending on those phases,
the volumes invested by
investors are one or the other.
Logically, in SID the sizes
are smaller and as the company
grows or the investment
needs rise, because
they are much larger
investment sizes.
How much of the companies are
you usually buying?
This is the difference
between venture capital
and private equity.
Venture capital, usually,
takes always minority shares
with percentages that
usually go between 5 and 25 per
cent per investor.
Then what happens is that there
are many companies that
are accumulating investors as they
are making funding rounds
and therefore the company’
s capital in the hands of the
set of investors ends up being
70 or 80 or 90 or 50, but it
doesn’t mean that there is an
investor who has that...
In other words, you would
be able to channel the
investment of different...
No, it’s not that, but it’s not an
investment that is made at a
given time and then never again.
Before you enter, by making a little
history, you go with an idea and
you tell it first to your friends,
family or Business Angels and those
put you for putting a figure
in total 100,000 euros and those
100,000 euros represent maybe
a 10% of the company, but each
individual one has the 2,
the other the 3, one the 1.
Then you put that in place and you
are already looking for another type
of financing and you get a venture
capital fund, early stage, and maybe
put you a million euros.
In exchange for that, the money
is 15%.
Well, you already have the 10
of the first round plus the
15, but we do not channel the
initial investment, but as
you make the team round, the entrepreneurs
are giving up part of the
capital for that money that
is coming in.
And that, as you go round,
what it means is that investors
end up controlling depending
on each...
Facebook, Mark Zuckerberg, did
it very well and controls
the majority, but usually,
as investors enter, entrepreneurs
go down their stake.
But that’s why I told you that individually
we are looking for, for example,
20%, more or less.
Is there any objective profitability?
I understand it depends on the stage
you enter, the risk, but...
Yes, we look at profitability
as a fund as a whole because
as funds work, they are closed
funds, that means that we
receive investment
commitment from investors
to invest that money
in a certain period of time,
which is usually four
or five years.
And then, and that’s called an investment
period, the investment period closes
and we have another similar
four or five-year period to
return that money we’ve invested
plus the expected return.
So, in our sector, what is expected
is to return around three
times the money.
That means that a fund of 40 million
euros is what you expect is to make
investments and de-investments
for 120 million euros to be able
to return the 40 that have given
you more than another 80.
I understand that by the type
of investment you make, of very high
risk, in some investments...
Well, that I think is an axiom that
is not entirely true and that is identified
venture capital with high risk
and within the highest risk
there are many people who
say this is binary or you lose everything
or this you multiply
by a thousand.
I think it is not so either.
We logically seek to generate
a return on our investments
of 10 times the volume invested.
Why is?
There are many others that will
be left on the way.
And the average, in the end, takes
you to the total bottom half of the target 3.
But initially when we invested
we don’t think that it will
generate a return of 3x or 2x
or 4x, but of 10 or 15 or 20x.
Why is?
Because many are left on the road
and the 10 are left on 3 and others
are left on 0, others simply
return the capital, etc.
But I mean, it’s not binary.
For example, in our first fund
that we invested in 31 companies
with a volume of investment,
after 5 years, only 18% have been
failed investments.
The binary would take you almost to 1-0
and the average would be at 50%.
Why is?
Because there are simply investments
that what they don’t do is get
to have the behavior you expected
and get the returns you
expected, but it doesn’
t mean they close.
They can become profitable
companies.
Yes, they are profitable companies
where you don’t end up selling them
for what you expected, but you end
up selling them and you end up getting
your money back or once and a
half or twice.
Do you prefer a particular
business model or a vertical
one?
We are, of course, specializing
in digital technology.
As I said before, there is a different kind of technology.
There is technology, there is
technology, there is technology.
Our is digital technology,
which is quite broad and
are B2C and B2B models,
that is, consumer-focused,
business-focused.
And within that in turn there
are a lot of subsectors or branches.
Do you prefer a marketplace?
No to.
What do you look for in a company?
Because in the end the key to a successful
business is to have enough criteria
to choose well where you are.
That is the most difficult thing.
We have invested in 46 companies
in the last five years, but
we’ve seen more than 4,000 between
4,000 and 5,000, so you’re
investing in 1% of the things
you see.
That’s what gives you, especially
in the initial phases, that is where
we invest, there is a lot of
subjectivity when analyzing investments,
basically because there
is no history.
It is that in the last three years I
have achieved this, that we have invested
in companies that have that
history and that we may have
entered when they already have four
or five years of history, but others
may have six months.
So, basically, we all look
at a little bit what
the technology is, what they
want to solve.
Is it a problem that many people
have or is it a problem that you have
or that I have?
If it’s a problem I have, there are
probably very few people who have
that problem.
So we try to see what they
are trying to solve.
In the learning course, one of the
lessons is how to validate that
there is actually a problem that
is the biggest and that people
are willing to pay for that
problem.
And then, you have already come
to that conclusion, with the technology
that this company has, how
can that be solved?
Or really help and there you see
entrance barriers.
I would tell you the size of the market.
You say, this is milk, because
this solves this problem, and
it is also a problem that has
a billion or that has
a lot of millions of people.
The size of the market is becoming more and more
complicated, isn’t it?
Yes, because every time you
get a presentation from some
company, the market size is
always at least 120 billion
U.S. dollars.
I think it’s a bit relevant...
The size of the market I say because
there are companies, for example, we
have been targeting what we
call non-customers.
It is a market that has not yet
existed, which we are creating.
There are many companies like that.
The other day I spoke with...
But that is different, isn’t it?
There is a lot of talk about artificial
intelligence.
We are investing in companies
with a high component of artificial
intelligence.
What does that mean?
Machine learning is based
on the information
it generates.
But artificial intelligence, the
first contact we all had, and
there will be young people who don’
t remember, but Tom Cruise’s
Minority Report film was based
on artificial intelligence
concepts, didn’t it?
How many have passed?
20 years of this movie.
What is now being seen are real
applications to current needs
based on artificial intelligence
and machine learning.
What there is is simply...
Whatever you say about the size of
the market, the market is there.
What is happening is a change in
the way things are done.
Yes, but sometimes what is clear is
that when the problem is big,
it has a lot of people and people
are willing to pay for it, because
you have the solution,
because you chose the solution,
but we find it complicated
sometimes to estimate the size
of the market, quantify
it in the markets in which
you are...
What happens is that they are very different
business models, because once I’
m going to set up a Facebook that
really isn’t a necessity.
Before Facebook existed, what
was the Facebook market?
I don’t know, because people don’t
have that need.
And another example is the models
that do digitize existing economies.
You can estimate the size of the
market.
For example, we have invested
in a company that facilitates
the online hiring
of containers,
containers for ships.
Then you can estimate the size
of the world’s container industry,
because that’s known, there are ships
that carry containers from one
site to another.
Why is it interesting?
Because that is a very offline
market, where you contract by
phone, fax, mail, tardan
and so on.
Our main investment is the digitalization
of the industry.
How much of what is currently available
offline can be purchased
online?
How can you buy?
To make an idea, it is very similar
to what happened to the...
People now don’t think of going
to a travel agency to
buy a plane ticket.
But it’s that before you had to go
to a travel agency to hire a plane
ticket and they didn’t sell it
to you at the time.
I told you, now I call you.
And they called you for three days and
said, 120,000 pesetas.
And, I know, but that is very expensive.
Oh, so wait, because maybe I get one
that goes way I don’t know where.
At four o’clock, they called again.
If it was Saturday, they would not call
you until Monday or Tuesday.
Today that is unthinkable.
You got a ticket, you put it on
any website and you buy it.
In these areas, the
size of the market
is very clear.
What is the value that technology offers?
In this case it is awesome, isn’t it?
It is undoubted.
There are others who do, and there
are those who are going to be.
Everything that has to do with cybersecurity.
Logically, as more and more
information is being managed,
or managed virtually, solutions
must appear to protect against
that, right?
A few years ago, it was not, because the
volume was much smaller.
Or anything that has to do with
cloud-based technologies.
There was no cloud.
Now there are other things that
you say, what is the size?
I know what the size is today, but
that has a brutal growth.
And if there are people who are dedicated
to doing research and understanding
what the evolution of the size
of the market is, that is, today
it is a market of 20 billion, but
it is growing to a 30% annual and
will be a market of 50,000 in
2025, to put an example.
Have you had any success
cases from a company you
entered, you left, or have
you been known?
In well-known companies, the
most popular ones are those used
by the consumer, the most.
We invest more in B2B,
so we know less.
I think we have a very interesting
portfolio of companies that have
had much success by the evolution
of their own business model, by
the type of investor that has
entered, very international,
from a Jovan Talent that
manages everything called
Blue Collar.
Yes, Jovan Talent is one of the
cases of Power M.
It’s an example of a company we entered
five years ago, when they were
very small, they were only nine
employees, now they are 200
and peak, and they are in Spain,
Colombia, Mexico, UK, Germany,
Sweden, etc.
We analyzed how they pivoted
the business model and from there
things are...
To make you an idea, our business
model implies being in the companies
a measure of seven years, with
which we have finished the investment
phase and we are now in the
consolidation and de-
investment phase, they will come.
Do you bring, finally, to the companies,
in addition to the financing
they need in the expansion,
synergies are generated between
the companies and you?
Well, we are just there in the
Jovan Talent council and after the
council we are talking about a few
topics, the synergies there is
brutal what is.
And in addition, as they are companies
with a very open mindset,
they don’t care that it’s another
startup with which they
provide a service and hire
them for things, which is a
bit different from the big company
that often will cost them
to hire a startup so that
they do anything.
Here I see if it depends on whether there
is a lot of difference between investors
and all models are equally valid, I
invest, I know nothing about your
sector, I don’t want to know anything
about your sector and also don’t call me.
We are a little different in that
sense, we have a team, I would say,
the largest in relative terms
in this sector and we are involved
a lot in the companies, we help
them a little to generate those
synergies in the commercial part
to facilitate leads from potential
customers.
If you tell me that you participate
in the experience you have,
having participated in, I imagine
that it is very enriching
what you can contribute in
the advice you told me yesterday.
At the end it is experience that is accumulating
and you learn, where less you learn
is of the things that are always good
and you learn a lot of those that have
gone through difficulties or
go wrong or have gone wrong and that
at the end the conclusion is that
it helps save a lot of money
and a lot of time to the companies.
In the end, it is possible
to add that.
Thank you very much, it has
been a pleasure and a great
enrichment for our students.